# Landmark Regions | APG | WAI | W3C

Source: https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/practices/landmark-regions/

---

Landmark Regions

## Introduction

ARIA landmark roles provide a powerful way to identify the organization and structure of a web page.
By classifying and labelling sections of a page, they enable structural information that is conveyed visually through layout to be represented programmatically.
Screen readers exploit landmark roles to provide keyboard navigation to important sections of a page.
Landmark regions can also be used as targets for "skip links" and by browser extensions to enhanced keyboard navigation.

This section explains how HTML sectioning elements and ARIA landmark roles are used to make it easy for assistive technology users to understand the meaning of the layout of a page.

## HTML Sectioning Elements

The following HTML sectioning elements create ARIA landmark regions.

Landmark roles generated by HTML sectioning elements

| HTML Element | Implied Landmark Role |
| --- | --- |
| `aside` | `complementary` |
| `footer` if it is in the context of a `body` element | `contentinfo` |
| `header` if it is in the context of a `body` element | `banner` |
| `main` | `main` |
| `nav` | `navigation` |
| `section` if it has an accessible name provided by `aria-labelledby` or `aria-label` | `region` |
| `search` | `search` |

## General Principles of Landmark Design

Including **all perceivable content** on a page in one of its landmark regions and giving each landmark region a semantically meaningful role is one of the most effective ways of ensuring assistive technology users will not overlook information that is relevant to their needs.

**Step 1: Identify the logical structure**

- Break the page into perceivable areas of content which designers typically indicate visually using alignment and spacing.
- Areas can be further defined into logical sub-areas as needed.
- An example of a sub-area is a portlet in a portal application.

**Step 2: Assign landmark roles to each area**

- Assign landmark roles based on the type of content in the area.
- `banner`, `main`, `complementary` and `contentinfo` landmarks should be top level landmarks.
- Landmark roles can be nested to identify parent/child relationships of the information being presented.
- Note that wrapping the content of a modal dialog in a landmark region is unnecessary.
  A landmark that wraps modal content cannot provide any benefit to users because it is not perceivable unless the modal is open.
  In addition, when a modal is open, a landmark containing its content is superfluous because the modal itself is a container that provides both a name and boundaries.

**Step 3: Label areas**

- If a specific landmark role is used more than once on a page, provide each instance of that landmark with a unique label.
  There is one rare circumstance where providing the same label to multiple instances of a landmark can be beneficial: the content and purpose of each instance is identical.
  For example, a large search results table has two sets of identical pagination controls -- one above and one below the table, so each set is in a navigation region labelled "Search Results".
  In this case, adding extra information to the label that distinguishes the two instances may be more distracting than helpful.
- If a landmark is only used once on the page it may not require a label.
  See Landmark Roles section below.
- If an area begins with a heading element (e.g. `h1-h6`) it can be used as the label for the area using the `aria-labelledby` attribute.
- If an area requires a label and does not have a heading element, provide a label using the `aria-label` attribute.
- Do not use the landmark role as part of the label.
  For example, a navigation landmark with a label "Site Navigation" will be announced by a screen reader as "Site Navigation Navigation".
  The label should simply be "Site".

## Landmark Roles

### Banner

A [`banner`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#banner) landmark identifies site-oriented content at the beginning of each page within a website.
Site-oriented content typically includes things such as the logo or identity of the site sponsor, and site-specific search tool.
A banner usually appears at the top of the page and typically spans the full width.

- Each page may have one `banner` landmark.
- The `banner` landmark should be a top-level landmark.
- When a page contains nested `document` and/or `application` roles (e.g. typically through the use of `iframe` and `frame` elements), each `document` or `application` role may have one `banner` landmark.
- If a page includes more than one `banner` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).

#### HTML Techniques

- The HTML `header` element defines a `banner` landmark when its context is the `body` element.
- The HTML `header` element is not considered a `banner` landmark when it is descendant of any of following elements (see [HTML Accessibility Mappings](https://w3c.github.io/html-aam/)):
  - `article`
  - `aside`
  - `main`
  - `nav`
  - `section`

#### ARIA Techniques

If the HTML `header` element technique is not being used, a `role="banner"` attribute should be used to define a `banner` landmark.

#### Examples

[Banner Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/banner.html)

### Complementary

A [`complementary`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#complementary) landmark is a supporting section of the document, designed to be complementary to the main content at a similar level in the DOM hierarchy, but remains meaningful when separated from the main content.

- `complementary` landmarks should be top level landmarks (e.g. not contained within any other landmarks).
- If the complementary content is not related to the main content, a more general role should be assigned (e.g. `region`).
- If a page includes more than one `complementary` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).

#### HTML Technique

Use the HTML `aside` element to define a `complementary` landmark.

#### ARIA Technique

If the HTML `aside` element technique is not being used, use a `role="complementary"` attribute to define a `complementary` landmark.

#### Examples

[Complementary Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/complementary.html)

### Contentinfo

A [`contentinfo`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#contentinfo) landmark is a way to identify common information at the bottom of each page within a website, typically called the "footer" of the page, including information such as copyrights and links to privacy and accessibility statements.

- Each page may have one `contentinfo` landmark.
- The `contentinfo` landmark should be a top-level landmark.
- When a page contains nested `document` and/or `application` roles (e.g. typically through the use of `iframe` and `frame` elements), each `document` or `application` role may have one `contentinfo` landmark.
- If a page includes more than one `contentinfo` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).

#### HTML Techniques

- The HTML `footer` element defines a `contentinfo` landmark when its context is the `body` element.
- The HTML `footer` element is not considered a `contentinfo` landmark when it is descendant of any of following elements (see [HTML Accessibility Mappings](https://w3c.github.io/html-aam/)):
  - `article`
  - `aside`
  - `main`
  - `nav`
  - `section`

#### ARIA Technique

If the HTML `footer` element technique is not being used, a `role="contentinfo"` attribute should be used to define a `contentinfo` landmark.

#### Examples

[Contentinfo Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/contentinfo.html)

### Form

A [`form`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#form) landmark identifies a region that contains a collection of items and objects that, as a whole, combine to create a form when no other named landmark is appropriate (e.g. main or search).

- Use the `search` landmark instead of the `form` landmark when the form is used for search functionality.
- A `form` landmark should have a label to help users understand the purpose of the form.
- A label for the `form` landmark should be visible to all users (e.g. an `h1-h6` element).
- If a page includes more than one `form` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).
- Whenever possible, controls contained in a `form` landmark in an HTML document should use native host semantics:
  - `button`
  - `input`
  - `select`
  - `textarea`

#### HTML Techniques

The HTML `form` element defines a `form` landmark when it has an accessible name (e.g. `aria-labelledby`, `aria-label` or `title`).

#### ARIA Technique

Use the `role="form"` to identify a region of the page; do not use it to identify every form field.

#### Examples

[Form Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/form.html)

### Main

A [`main`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#main) landmark identifies the primary content of the page.

- Each page should have one `main` landmark.
- The `main` landmark should be a top-level landmark.
- When a page contains nested `document` and/or `application` roles (e.g. typically through the use of `iframe` and `frame` elements), each `document` or `application` role may have one `main` landmark.
- If a page includes more than one `main` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).

#### HTML Technique

Use the HTML `main` element to define a `main` landmark.

#### ARIA Technique

If the HTML `main` element technique is not being used, use a `role="main"` attribute to define a `main` landmark.

#### Examples

[Main Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/main.html)

### Navigation

[`Navigation`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#navigation) landmarks provide a way to identify groups (e.g. lists) of links that are intended to be used for website or page content navigation.

- If a page includes more than one `navigation` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).
- If a `navigation` landmark has an identical set of links as another `navigation` landmark on the page, use the same label for each `navigation` landmark.

#### HTML Technique

Use the HTML `nav` element to define a `navigation` landmark.

#### ARIA Technique

If the HTML `nav` element technique is not being used, use a `role="navigation"` attribute to define a `navigation` landmark.

#### Examples

[Navigation Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/navigation.html)

### Region

A [`region`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#region) landmark is a perceivable section of the page containing content that is sufficiently important for users to be able to navigate to the section.

- A `region` landmark must have a label.
- If a page includes more than one `region` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).
- The `region` landmark can be used to identify content that named landmarks do not appropriately describe.

#### HTML Technique

The HTML `section` element defines a `region` landmark when it has an accessible name (e.g. `aria-labelledby`, `aria-label` or `title`).

#### ARIA Technique

If the HTML `section` element technique is not being used, use a `role="region"` attribute to define a `region` landmark.

#### Examples

[Region Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/region.html)

### Search

A [`search`](https://w3c.github.io/aria/#search) landmark contains a collection of items and objects that, as a whole, combine to create search functionality.

- Use the `search` landmark instead of the `form` landmark when the form is used for search functionality.
- If a page includes more than one `search` landmark, each should have a unique label (see [Step 3](#aria_lh_step3) above).

#### HTML Technique

Use the HTML `search` element to define a `search` landmark.

#### ARIA Technique

If the HTML `search` element technique is not being used, use a `role="search"` attribute to define a `search` landmark.

#### Examples

[Search Landmark Example](../../patterns/landmarks/examples/search.html)